JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
startling news
from Turkey -- gunfire and
low-flying jets
in nation's capital, as an
attempted military
coup unfolds.
And celebration becomes
nightmare. We get
the latest from Southern France,
where at
least 84 are dead and hundreds
injured after
a massacre by one man in a
truck.
Plus: Donald Trump confirms
Indiana's Mike
Pence as his vice presidential
choice. A look
at the Midwestern governor, and
what he brings
to the Republican ticket.
And it's Friday. Mark Shields
and David Brooks
analyze another full week of
news.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: There are
shocking events in
Turkey tonight: The military
says that it
has carried out a coup in the
name of democracy,
to counter autocratic rule and
growing terrorism
in that NATO member state.
Helicopters, warplanes and
troops have spread
across the capital, Ankara, and
Istanbul to
take control. President
Erdogan's whereabouts
are unclear, but he's told CNN's
Turkish branch
take control. President
Erdogan's whereabouts
are unclear, but he's told CNN's
Turkish branch
that the coup will be put down.
President Obama is being updated
on the situation
as it unfolds, according to the
National Security
Council spokesperson.
I'm joined now by Steven Cook.
He's a senior
fellow at the Council on Foreign
Relations
here in Washington. And he joins
me via Skype.
Steven Cook, can you add
anything from your
sources about what's happening
there?
STEVEN COOK, Council on Foreign
Relations:
Well, Judy, thanks very much.
I have been on the phone and
texting and e-mailing
with my contacts in Istanbul and
Ankara, and
they are bewildered as anybody
else. In fact,
we probably know more about
what's going on
in Ankara and Istanbul than most
of those
people, many of whom are at
home, have been
unable to access the Internet,
have been unable
to get news because there's been
largely a
news blackout.
JUDY WOODRUFF: If the military
is able to
pull this off or even get as far
as they have,
what would be behind it? What is
the tension
underlying this clearly serious
divide between
President Erdogan and the
military?
STEVEN COOK: Well, first of all,
we have to
be very careful in talking about
the military
or a faction within the
military, which is
something that is not
unprecedented in Turkish
history.
But there are a number of
tensions between
the government and military
officers, including
what the military, or some
within the military,
I should say, believe to be
adventurism in
Syria, failure of the government
to protect
Turkish citizens.
We saw a horrific terrorist
attack in the
Istanbul Airport last week after
a string
of terrorist attacks over the
course of last
year, and, of course, Erdogan's
drive to consolidate
his power. The Turkish military
has long been
the locus of authority and
legitimacy in the
Turkish political system.
Erdogan has sought to supplant
them over the
course of the last 13 or so
years. It may
in fact be time that younger
officers or a
faction within one of the
services decides
they have had enough.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we know
that Turkey plays
an enormously strategic role in
the Middle
East, in that part of the world.
What would
it mean if there were a change
in who's in
power there?
STEVEN COOK: Well, there is all
kinds of implications
about a change in power. None of
them are
very clear at the moment, but
just think about
Turkey's geography. It literally
sits at the
center of some of the most
important pressing
foreign policy concerns,
including the conflicts
in Syria, the conflicts in Iraq,
the generalized
instability in the region,
whereas Turkey
who was once seen as a
stabilizing force in
the Middle East and does still
play an important
role in the Syrian conflict in
Iraq with the
Kurds.
It is now clearly an unstable
country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Steven Cook, how
popular is
President Erdogan in that
country?
STEVEN COOK: This is an
extraordinarily important
point, Judy.
He is quite popular, and he has
made a call
for his supporters to go out in
the streets
and to resist this intervention
on the part
of the military. It's
extraordinarily dangerous,
but what we often miss or what's
often missed
in the discussion of Turkey is
that there
is been so much focus on Erdogan
and his personality
and his drive to consolidate
power that at
least half of the country
supports Erdogan.
And you have to imagine that at
least some
of those who are not supporters
of Erdogan
do not want to see a return to
military rule
in Turkey.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But just quickly,
we know that
increasingly in recent months he
has cracked
down on the news media, on
social media. He's
made some significant changes
there, has he
not?
STEVEN COOK: He has made many
significant
changes. Turkey, which was once
a promising
country, one that everybody
hoped would make
a transition to democracy, has
made a U-turn
and it looks more like an
authoritarian system,
rather than a democratic system
now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Steven Cook with
the Council
-- now I'm told that we have
another minute
or two. We were waiting to get
to a reporter
on the ground in Turkey.
While we wait for that, so, as
we sit and
think about what the
implications would be
if there were a change in
leadership, we're
really looking at a complete
unknown. This
really does come out of the
blue, does it
not?
STEVEN COOK: It does.
There were some indications from
some analysts
who have been suggesting that
possibly the
military would make a move.
However, it seems
completely out of the blue, and
it's not at
all clear what this group of
officers who
are attempting to take power
actually stand
for. They have released a
statement saying
that they are reestablishing
rule of law in
the country, but that is kind of
standard
fare after coups d'etat for the
military acting
to make that kind of statement.
We are completely in the unknown
as of this
moment. Perhaps in the coming
hours, things
will be clearer. But what I
think should be
for looking is how Erdogan and
his supporters
response. Already, over social
media, you
can see Erdogan's supporters
swarming tanks
that are in the streets in
Istanbul and other
places.
So this is by no means a done
deal for those
who are attempting to take power
right now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Swarming tanks.
So it could
be the public will have its say
in all of
this as well.
STEVEN COOK: At least Erdogan
supporters.
Like I just said, he has called
upon his people
to come out into the streets. We
will have
to see how big those protests
become.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that means he
still must
have some control of
communications if he's
able to get that word out.
STEVEN COOK: Well, he has gotten
that word
out reportedly via FaceTime with
CNN's Turkish
affiliate, which is -- which
would suggest
that the situation is difficult
for President
Erdogan, but he has been able to
make that
statement.
The prime minister, Binali
Yildirim, was on
television earlier today calling
for people
to come out and resist.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Steven Cook with
the Council
on Foreign Relations, we thank
you very much
for joining us at the last
minute.
And now we want to try to get
some perspective
on the ground in this
fast-moving story.
And for that, we turn to Simone
Dimocon (ph)
of Bloomberg News. She is in
Istanbul.
Simone, tell us what you are
seeing and hearing
there right now.
Our apologies. We thought we did
have a reporter
there in Istanbul.
You can imagine, given the
situation, communications
are not what they normally are.
We are going
to try to continue to reach her.
She is a
reporter for Bloomberg News in
Istanbul, and
we will continue to try to reach
her.
Meantime, two other major news
stories also
dominated this day.
First, the aftermath of last
night's attack
in Southern France. More than 80
people died
in Nice, and more than 200 were
hurt, when
a large truck rode down
revelers; 24 hours
later, there was no claim of
responsibility,
and more questions than answers.
Special correspondent Jane
Ferguson reports.
JANE FERGUSON: The crime scene,
along the
city's waterfront, was eerily
quiet today,
as investigators and forensics
teams searched
for evidence. Covered bodies
still dotted
the palm-tree-lined boulevard.
Through the day, onlookers
visited the site,
many still in shock.
WOMAN: I don't feel safe. I
don't feel safe
for me. I don't feel safe for my
family, not
for my children. I do not feel
safe.
JANE FERGUSON: Police have now
identified
the attacker as 31-year-old
Mohamed Bouhlel,
a Tunisian man who lived in
Nice.
Last night, he plowed a large
white truck
into crowds of revelers. This
promenade along
the shorefront in Nice was
packed with people
who had come to celebrate
Bastille Day. In
France, that's essentially their
version of
July 4. And so there are
fireworks here, and
many brought their families to
enjoy them.
And, tragically, that's why so
many children
were amongst the casualties.
The celebrating turned to bloody
chaos, when
the truck hurtled down the
popular Promenade
des Anglais along the
Mediterranean coastline
for a full mile-and-a-half.
Officials estimated
some 30,000 people, including
many tourists,
were gathered there, and the
driver zigzagged
to run down as many as possible.
WOMAN (through translator): It
was horrible.
At the beginning, we didn't
understand what
was going on. We saw the truck
and, suddenly,
life came to a halt. Then we saw
the people
panicking and running towards
the alleys,
and we followed them.
FRANCOIS, France: Everybody was
running. Some
people were on the phone. Most
of the people
were on the phone, calling their
friends,
where are you? I have lost you.
Some -- some
mothers with their children,
they were looking
for their children, and losing
their shoes
and running, running just
escaping. And it
was really scary.
JANE FERGUSON: The carnage ended
only when
police killed Bouhlel in a hail
of gunfire,
leaving the truck's windshield
riddled with
bullets. It also left
investigators to puzzle
out what drove a man who had no
immediately
apparent links to extremists to
do this.
FRANCOIS MOLINS, Paris
Prosecutor (through
translator): The investigation
will indeed
aim to determine, firstly, how
the attacker
was able to get the weapon and
truck he used
for his crimes. It will also try
to determine
whether he benefited from
accomplices and
had ties to an Islamist
terrorist organization.
This type of action fits in
perfectly with
the constant calls for murder
from such terrorist
organizations.
JANE FERGUSON: This afternoon,
the truck was
hauled away from the scene.
Elsewhere in Nice, President
Francois Hollande
met with police and military
authorities,
and he ran into catcalls on the
way there,
after the third mass casualty
attack since
January of last year.
FRANCOIS HOLLANDE, French
President (through
translator): The lesson that we
must also
learn from this tragedy, from
this terrorist
attack, is that we are facing a
long battle.
We have an enemy that will
continue to attack
all the people, all the
countries who possess
freedom as an essential value.
JANE FERGUSON: Hollande has
called up military
and police reservists, and is
moving to extend
a state of emergency for three
more months.
It was put in place after last
November's
Islamic State attacks across
Paris killed
130 people and wounded hundreds
more.
Condolences also poured in from
other capitals.
In Washington, President Obama
reflected on
the tragedy, as he hosted a
diplomatic reception.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
We pledge to stand with our
French friends
as we defend our nations against
this scourge
of terrorism and violence. And
this is a threat
to all of us. We don't know all
the details,
but what we know is the capacity
of even a
single individual to do
extraordinary harm
to our people, to our way of
life.
JANE FERGUSON: And, around the
world, people
paid respect to the victims by
leaving flowers
at French embassies.
And here in France, the
government has declared
three days of national mourning,
beginning
tomorrow, as investigators
search for answers
in a shaken country -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jane, we are
seeing the grief
and the shock on the part of the
French people.
How is this affecting the
politics of the
country?
JANE FERGUSON: Well, we have
already seen
today, Judy, far-right leaders
jumping on
the issue as a way to promote an
anti-immigration
stance.
We have seen the leader of the
National Front
Party, Marine Le Pen, say there
should be
a war declared on radical Islam.
Now, it's
not clear yet on whether or not
this attack
was linked to radical Islam. No
group like
ISIS or al-Qaida have claimed
responsibility,
but it has reignited the debate
in France
about immigration because the
attacker was
of Tunisian descent.
Now, here, where attack took
place, people
have been coming down to pay
their respects
today. You may see behind me
where some flowers
have been placed. People have
been lighting
candles and leaving mementos
here. And they
have been having lively debates
about that
very subject, some saying that
the government
here needs to take a stronger
stance against
immigration, but others here
also saying that
this is not the time for such
divisions and
that, in fact, this violence
shouldn't be
responded to violently and that
France itself
should pull together.
But, again, we're seeing after
such an attack
as we have seen in the past in
Europe and
America, where large numbers of
civilians
have been targeted, there is
afterwards a
lively and sometimes very
divisive debate
about immigration, and France is
no different.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Jane Ferguson
reporting for
us from Nice, France, the site
of last night's
terrible attack.
Thank you, Jane.
And we turn now to Hari
Sreenivasan in New
York now for more.
HARI SREENIVASAN: With me now is
the French
ambassador to the United States,
Gerard Araud.
Ambassador, our condolences to
you on this
day.
First question: Has the
government found a
connection between the actions
of this man,
whether he was radicalized by
ISIS?
GERARD ARAUD, French Ambassador
to the United
States: No.
So far, while the investigation
is going on,
but we have -- he wasn't on the
list of radicalized
people that we are monitoring.
And we are
now investigating his life, and
all the testimonies
that we have show that the guy
wasn't religious,
you know, really. So, let's wait
the result
of what was found in his
computer. So maybe
there is here we find a link
with ISIL. But,
so far, there is none.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What does the
French government
do to prevent something like
this? What more
can be done?
GERARD ARAUD: You know, the
problem is that
you have two types of terrorism
today, one
that's the people coming back
from Syria where
they have been trained,
radicalized, and in
a sense it's a question of
intelligence, to
follow them, to see what they
are doing, trying
to prevent them to come back and
to strike.
But the second type of
terrorism, you have
the individuals. And that's --
it's much more
complicated, because
individuals, which have
absolutely no record of
association with radicalized
-- radical Islam could suddenly
do what they
are doing, like what he has done
today, and
that's -- for intelligence, for
the security,
it's quite tough.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You had an
increased state
of emergency already since the
previous attacks.
It didn't work. How would adding
more police
or military forces to the
streets stop an
individual with a truck?
GERARD ARAUD: That's a very good
question.
You know, in a sense, you have
had with Orlando
exactly the same challenge. So,
it means that
not only do we have to provide
more security
to our citizens, with police,
but also the
army in the streets, but it also
means also
that we have to solve, and to
put an end to
the Syrian civil war, which is
really the
origin of all this violent
propaganda.
HARI SREENIVASAN: How does the
French government
try to integrate its newcomers
any better,
because there have been concerns
that there
are pockets within France, they
are keeping
to themselves, they aren't
understanding perhaps
a greater loyalty to the idea of
being French?
GERARD ARAUD: Well, frankly,
when you look
at the integration of Muslims in
Europe, I
don't think that the situation
in France is
worse or even better -- or
better than the
other European countries.
I think we have -- like in this
very country
in the U.S., we have
disenfranchised immigrants.
But it's not because you are
disenfranchised
that you are going to commit
these atrocities.
It is something else.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But France has
also sent
a very large number. More than
100 people
have signed up from France,
French citizens,
to go fight this in Iraq or in
Syria.
GERARD ARAUD: Oh, you have --
actually, we
have identified 2,000 French
citizens who
have gone to Syria and Iraq,
2,000.
I think the figure for the
Americans is 200,
because of the geography, of
course. So, these
people, again, they will come
back and they
will come back with military
training, radicalized,
rapidly anti-Semitism, and there
will be a
threat.
So we are doing our best to
intercept them
before they enter our territory,
to arrest
them, to indict them, to prevent
them from
striking. But you saw that with
the attack
in November in the Bataclan.
There are some
of them we have not identified.
So, the threat
is still there.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Ambassador,
while I have
you here, you have been hearing
the reports
today, as we have been watching
on television,
in Turkey. There are tanks on
the street.
The president of the country is
in an unknown
location. He's using FaceTime to
try and communicate
with his people and tell people
to go out
to the streets.
Your thoughts?
GERARD ARAUD: Well, first, I
think our answer
is to express our commitment to
the defense
of the constitutional order in
Turkey.
You know, really, the Turkish
government,
the Turkish president has been
elected by
the Turks through a
constitutional process.
So we can simply express our
hope that this
constitutional order which will
be upheld,
and secondly, of course, to hope
that there
are no civilian casualties.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The sort of
correlation
or connection here is how
important it is
for France to be fighting ISIS
right now.
And how important is the
stability of Turkey
in that fight?
GERARD ARAUD: Of course.
Really, Turkey has -- really, at
the same
time, has suffered a lot because
of the Syrian
civil war. Millions of
immigrants have gone
to -- the refugees have gone to
Turkey. The
borders have been destabilized,
so really
Turkey is carrying really a real
burden.
And Turkey, by definition,
considering its
geography, has a role to play
into solving
the Syrian civil war.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And what about
the political
pushback that you're likely
getting right
now? We have heard already that
the far right
and Marine Le Pen is calling for
tighter immigration
controls and calling out a war
on radical
Islam.
Is this something that the
government is willing
to consider, given the tragedies
that you
have been experiencing in the
past six months?
GERARD ARAUD: No, what is
striking, when you
look at political life in
Western democracies,
from the U.S. to Scandinavia, is
that we're
facing the same outbreak of
(INAUDIBLE) in
the U.S., in Britain with
Brexit, in France
with the National Front, in
Scandinavia, and
the same outburst against
immigration.
And it's obvious that, when you
see these
sort of attacks that we have had
in Nice,
it's -- in a sense, it's a spur
for opportunism.
We will have presidential
elections in May
2017, so we will see what is the
consequence
of the situation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
French Ambassador
to the United States Gerard
Araud, thanks
so much for your time.
GERARD ARAUD: Thank you very
much.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The day also
brought major
news in the presidential
campaign:
Republican Donald Trump
confirmed that Indiana
Governor Mike Pence will be his
running mate.
Trump tweeted his decision, but
he delayed
a formal appearance, citing the
attack in
Nice.
John Yang begins our coverage:
JOHN YANG: The Indiana governor
arrived at
Trump Tower this afternoon,
ready to go.
GOV. MIKE PENCE (R), Indiana:
I'm looking
forward to meeting with the
Trumps and talking
about our plans for tomorrow and
every day
between now and Election Day.
JOHN YANG: At first, they seemed
unlikely
allies, Donald Trump, the brash
outsider from
New York, who's never held
public office,
and Mike Pence, staunch
Midwestern conservative,
with a long career in politics
and deep ties
to the Republican establishment.
GOV. MIKE PENCE: I'm not against
anybody,
but I will be voting for Ted
Cruz.
JOHN YANG: Less than three
months ago, Pence
endorsed Trump's opponent in the
Indiana primary.
Trump won that contest. Cruz
dropped out.
And Pence threw his support
behind the billionaire.
GOV. MIKE PENCE: We're ready to
put a fighter,
a builder and a patriot in the
Oval Office
of the United States of America.
We're ready
for Donald Trump to be our next
president.
JOHN YANG: Still, differences
remain. Pence
is a longtime advocate of trade
deals like
NAFTA. Trump has made opposition
to such agreements
a centerpiece of his campaign.
Trump has called
the 2003 Iraq invasion a
mistake. Pence was
a vocal supporter. And Pence
came out against
Trump's proposed ban on Muslim
immigration,
calling the idea offensive and
unconstitutional.
The 57-year-old Pence served six
terms in
the House and was elected to the
leadership.
In 2012, he won a close race for
governor
of Indiana. Last year, he
triggered an uproar,
signing a bill that could have
let business
owners discriminate against gays
and lesbians
based on religious beliefs.
After big business in the state
complained,
Pence signed a measure
protecting LGBT customers.
His selection for the national
ticket today
drew praise from top
Republicans.
REINCE PRIEBUS, Republican
National Committee
Chairman: What I think Mike
Pence brings to
the table is, he's -- I think
he's measured.
I think he's experienced. I
think he, I think,
shores up a conservative base
that's important.
I think that he's a
complementary to Donald
Trump as far as personality.
JOHN YANG: And in a statement,
House Speaker
Paul Ryan said: "I can think of
no better
choice for our vice presidential
candidate.
He will help bring real change
to Washington."
Trump and Pence will make their
first public
appearance as the newly minted
GOP ticket
tomorrow morning in New York.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And joining us
now is reporter
who has covered Governor Pence
in the Hoosier
State, Brandon Smith. He is
statehouse bureau
chief for Indiana Public
Broadcasting. He
joins us from Indianapolis.
Welcome back to the program,
Brandon Smith.
So, how is Governor Mike Pence
seen in the
state of Indiana by the
Republicans, by the
people?
BRANDON SMITH, Indiana Public
Broadcasting:
I wouldn't say he's as popular
as the national
folks are making him seem.
He's been somewhat divisive as a
governor.
Certainly, he came in on a
message of continuing
the policies of his predecessor,
Mitch Daniels.
And that has been a lot of his
focus when
you talk about his agenda with
the legislature.
But, as was mentioned in that
piece, he has
dealt with a lot of controversy
over the way
he has handled certain issue,
like the religious
freedom debate, like this year
the signing
of a harsh anti-abortion bill
and the way
he's handled that and the
resistance to that.
So, he's sort of been divisive,
because you
look at -- Indiana is a pretty
conservative
state, and yet a Republican
governor seeking
reelection was in a virtual tie
with his Democratic
opponent.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What is it about
the way he's
handled these issues, these
controversies
that's been a question for him?
What's made
it controversial?
BRANDON SMITH: A big part of it
is his philosophy,
really, as a politician. When he
was in Congress
and coming into his job as
governor here,
he was known as a great
communicator, a good
speechmaker, and certainly
someone who stayed
on message.
That's fine I Congress. It
didn't work so
well when he got to Indiana as
governor. He
would be asked direct questions
by myself
and other reporters, more
importantly direct
follow-up questions asking for
specifics for
legislative proposals he was
pushing or things
moving through legislature, for
instance,
that he would need to sign or
not sign, and
he simply wouldn't give answers.
He had his one or two talking
points and he
stuck to those all the time. He
couldn't get
-- he wouldn't be shaken loose,
even when
arguably he needed to be. That
was seen notably
in the middle of the religious
freedom controversy.
He went on national television
to be interviewed
about it. And when asked direct
questions
about whether or not the bill
discriminated
against the LGBT community, he
couldn't answer
the yes-or-no question.
And that's really a big part of
what's hurt
him as he's tried to be
governor.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Brandon Smith, we
know Mike
Pence is described as a -- quote
-- "reliable
conservative."
How conservative is he? Where do
you draw
the lines in his -- where --
what his political
views are?
BRANDON SMITH: Well, he's pretty
conservative.
Like I mentioned, he signed that
anti-abortion
bill earlier this year that even
a lot of
Republican lawmakers in this
state advocated
strongly against, because they
felt it went
too far.
That's something I don't think
Mike Pence
really balked at all, which
endears him to
particularly social
conservatives, which is
part of the reason I think Trump
picked him.
But you heard in the piece that
he supported
the Iraq War. He went against
President Bush
during the No Child Left Behind
debate. So
he...
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, if I could
interrupt,
he disagreed with Donald Trump
on whether
Muslims -- there should be a
Muslim ban in
this country.
BRANDON SMITH: That's true,
although he has
tried to establish a policy in
Indiana where
Indiana would deny Syrian
refugees from entering
the state. So I'm not sure of
how much a line
he really drew there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How -- everybody
is wanting
to know what kind of vice
president would
he be. What about his
decision-making? What
is known about that?
BRANDON SMITH: He has a pretty
tight inner
circle. And his wife, Karen,
plays a huge
part in that.
When you them out in public
together holding
hands, that's not a political
show. They really
are very close. And she plays a
big role in
his life and his decision-making
and his policy-making,
is the sense. And his inner
circle here in
Indiana again, as I mentioned,
is pretty tight.
A lot of his advisers go back to
his time
as -- Congress.
His first chief of staff had
been his chief
of staff during his entire
congressional time.
One of his key advisers as
governor now, his
communications director, was his
communications
person in Congress. The sense is
that the
circle isn't very wide.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There has been a
lot of reporting
today, Brandon, about how --
quote -- "unpredictable"
Donald Trump is. And on the
other hand, Mike
Pence is seen more predictable,
a calmer presence.
How do you see that?
BRANDON SMITH: That's absolutely
true. It
goes back to that idea of his
philosophy is,
I'm going to have my one or two
talking points
and I'm going to say those
no matter what is asked of me.
As a vice presidential running
mate, that
will probably -- certainly, as a
running mate
to Donald Trump, that will
probably be very
valuable and certainly appealing
to national
Republicans who are
uncomfortable with the
unpredictability of Trump's
campaign.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, we know,
finally, Brandon,
that he -- if he hadn't been
chosen as Donald
Trump's running mate, he was
expected to run
for reelection as governor. What
kind of race
was he facing there?
BRANDON SMITH: A very, very
close one. He
was facing the same person he
ran against
for governor in 2012, former
Indiana House
Speaker John Gregg.
But while Mike Pence only beat
John Gregg
by 3 percentage points in 2012,
in the polling
we have seen in this state, in
the limited
polling we have seen in this
state so far,
that looked to be virtually the
same, almost
a virtual tie, and some pretty
unfavorable
numbers for a conservative
governor in Mike
Pence.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is there any
doubt in your
mind that Indiana is going -- we
know it's
traditionally gone Republican
for president.
Any doubt in your mind it's
trending in Donald
Trump's direction in this
election?
BRANDON SMITH: Absolutely no
doubt whatsoever.
This state will vote for Donald
Trump. I would
be shocked if it were even
close.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right,
Brandon Smith with
Indiana Public Broadcasting,
thank you very
much.
BRANDON SMITH: Thanks for having
me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, with the
Republican Convention
just three days away now, our
Lisa Desjardins
is already in Cleveland with
this look at
how the city is preparing for
rising concerns
over country.
LISA DESJARDINS: The welcome
signs are flying,
the parks are green and
gorgeous, but on the
eve of this long-awaited moment
for Cleveland,
the city is holding its breath.
CALVIN WILLIAMS, Cleveland,
Ohio, Police Chief:
We have to ensure everybody's
safety, whether
they're a protester, a delegate,
or a visitor
or a person that lives here in
the city of
Cleveland.
LISA DESJARDINS: The city and
police department
have a two-part plan, one, a
secure fenced-in
zone around the two main
convention sites.
That's standard practice in
convention cities.
But there is a second zone, a
much wider area
outside the perimeters, where
the city and
police have banned a number of
items, from
Tasers to tennis balls. But
police say guns
will be allowed, due to Ohio's
open carry
law.
TAYLOR BOHLEN, Cleveland Police
Department
: Next week is just -- I'm
concerned about
the mass of people, but it's
going to be the
same situations that we deal
with every day
while we're working out on the
street, just
on a larger scale.
LISA DESJARDINS: The
restrictions have gone
too far, according to ACLU Ohio
staff attorney
Elizabeth Bonham. She
successfully sued, forcing
changes in the city's security
plan.
ELIZABETH BONHAM, ACLU:
Originally, the way
the city drew these restrictions
was extremely
broad. They cannot leave the
First Amendment
rights of all the people coming
here to demonstrate
or celebrate or what have you on
the back
burner.
LISA DESJARDINS: The result is a
downtown
zone that includes places like
this park,
Public Square. It's where
officials hope thousands
of protesters will go, but some
protest groups
tell us that they think the
restrictions are
too tight and they're not going
to follow
the rules.
Others say they are preparing
now to try and
prevent violence. Tea Party
activist Ralph
King is planning a pro-Trump
event for Monday.
He took the rare step of meeting
with these
anti-Trump activists this week,
recording
a short video asking for calm.
RALPH KING, Tea Party Activist:
I don't care
if you're for Mr. Trump, you're
against Mr.
Trump. I don't care if you're a
Black Lives
Matter. If you want to come to
Cleveland,
you act and you respect our
city. If you don't
want to, we don't want you here.
LISA DESJARDINS: King says he's
not nervous,
but Jeff Yaw (ph) is. He's a
local filmmaker
producing a documentary about
the convention.
MAN: Yes, I'm worried. I think
you have to
be. I think, if you're not,
you're perhaps
unprepared.
LISA DESJARDINS: Cleveland
police say they're
prepared, using a $50 million
federal government
security grant to buy equipment
and non-lethal
weapons.
Joining them will be 3,000
federal security
officials and thousands of state
National
Guard and officers on loan from
other departments.
Clevelanders themselves say that
adds confidence,
especially after the attack in
Nice, France.
ANDREW ROBINSON, Cleveland: I'm
real happy
there is going to be a lot of
security. I'm
real happy.
BRYAN GOZELANCZYK, Cleveland: I
think that's
always a concern, but, I mean, I
have a lot
of faith in, you know, not only
the Cleveland
police, the Cuyahoga County
Sheriff's Office
and everyone else that is kind
of working
to secure the event.
LISA DESJARDINS: Most of these
folks are first-time
protesters, a group of doctors
that formed
Stand Against Trump and now
think their protest
march next Thursday may draw
thousands.
Surgeon Jana Hambley.
JANA HAMBLEY, Protester: We are
committed
to being completely peaceful.
This is a nonviolent
group. For the most part, we are
all medical
professionals, and so most of us
have taken
oaths in our personal and
professional life
to uphold human life.
LISA DESJARDINS: Babu
Chandrababu owns and
runs Cafe Sausalito, a downtown
restaurant
that was set to close just six
years ago,
when he turned it around.
SARAVANAN "BABU" CHANDRABABU,
Cafe Sausalito:
All the protesters, media,
everything is going
to be on our side, so we are
very concerned
about it and especially our
employees are
scared.
LISA DESJARDINS: Scared of what
might happen
next week, given the
restaurant's proximity
to the security barrier. His
customers, like
Emily Berndt, they are worried,
too. She's
not going to work next week.
EMILY BERNDT, Cleveland:
Primarily, it's the
road closures. My bus has to
stop way far
away from where I work, and so
it makes it
more difficult to get to work,
and also I
was concerned about the possible
protesters.
LISA DESJARDINS: Concerns shared
by many,
the public, protesters and
police.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins
in Cleveland.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that brings
us to the analysis
of Shields and Brooks.
That is syndicated columnist
Mark Shields
and New York Times columnist
David Brooks.
Gentlemen, we're going to lashed
at the hip,
I think, next week. You're
heading to Cleveland.
And we don't know whether
there's going to
be disruptions or not.
But, Mark, let's start by
talking about Donald
Trump setting the table. He has
now chosen
his running mate, Mike Pence.
What do you
think? We just heard from a
reporter in Indiana.
What do you make of this?
MARK SHIELDS: I think Mike Pence
was the least
Trump-like of the three
finalists. And in
that sense, he makes sense.
He's got conservative -- solid
conservative
credentials, especially with
social conservatives.
And he's articulate. He's
personable, he's
got national ambitions. He's
made no secret
of them in the past.
I would just remind him that
it's -- a successful
vice president -- an
unsuccessful vice presidential
candidate has been elected
president of the
United States exactly once in
the nation's
history. I mean, we have got
President Joe
Lieberman, President John
Edwards.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You said an
unsuccessful...
MARK SHIELDS: An unsuccessful.
Franklin Roosevelt,
who lost in 1920, and got
elected in 1932.
So, it's not necessarily a road
to the White
House on an unsuccessful vice
presidential
campaign. But I think he makes
sense for Trump,
given Trump's special problems.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Makes sense?
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will let you
explore that.
DAVID BROOKS: He does have
special problems.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Makes sense?
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: I think special...
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, all right.
Yes, I think so. Of the three
that were available.
It wasn't like everyone was
available to him,
and so he picked the one who
doesn't cause
him any problems.
I got to know Mike Pence. I
first met him
in the early '90s. He was a talk
radio host
in Indiana. I think his slogan
was, I'm the
Rush -- decaf Rush Limbaugh.
MARK SHIELDS: That's right. It
was.
DAVID BROOKS: And so he was less
spicy. And
his demeanor is sweet and kind.
And in the House, he was
successful, because
he's a nice guy, genuinely nice
guy. But if
he was a decaf Rush Limbaugh, I
don't know
what he is to Donald Trump.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: He is going to --
I think he
will disappear, frankly. I think
it's a less
important vice presidential pick
than any
we have had, just because Trump
is his own
show.
And he hasn't promoted a rival
show. He's
just going to be his own show.
And Pence will
appear at the vice presidential
debate, but
I would be surprised if we were
talking too
much about him for the next few
months.
MARK SHIELDS: One quick point,
Judy, that
Trump said that he wanted an
attack dog, someone
who could be a pit bull or
whatever.
And Mike Pence is the opposite
of that. He
ran for Congress in 1988 and
1990 against
a longtime Democratic incumbent,
Phil Sharp,
in that district, and he lost
twice. And after
the second defeat, he wrote an
article entitled
"Confessions of a Serial
Negative Campaigner."
And he apologized for running
negative ads
and so forth. I mean, that
doesn't sound like
an attack dog to me.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, unless they
wanted a Middle
Western, Midwestern...
(CROSSTALK)
DAVID BROOKS: ... something,
compared to Donald
Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sweet? Sweet?
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But what does it
say, though?
We have been hearing in the last
24, 48 hours
about Donald Trump maybe having
second thoughts
at midnight last night. There
was the back
and forth.
He told one interviewer: I'm
close to a decision.
I want somebody on national
security."
And then he told somebody else:
No, it's down
to three.
What do you make of this whole
process?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, this is not
a real campaign.
Like, there is a certain norm of
the way things
are done. Usually, when you
announce your
vice presidential candidate,
there is like
a professional rollout. Like,
you do trivial
things like updating your Web
page, which
the Trump campaign didn't do for
a little
while.
MARK SHIELDS: That's right.
DAVID BROOKS: And so they're
just -- it's
a one-man show.
And one gets the impression
everyone else
around is sort of in the dark,
and Trump is
deciding or not deciding. And,
as a result,
the institutional presence that
a campaign
has, where decisions get made,
and things
get done and conventions get
organized, a
lot of that, it's unclear if
that's happening.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And speaking of
that, Mark,
comment on how they have handled
this, the
Pence rollout.
But here we are, two or three
days ahead of
the start of the convention. We
still, as
far as I know, as of an hour
ago, didn't have
the schedule. We don't know
who's speaking
in what order, the kinds of
things that the
candidates normally do.
MARK SHIELDS: Historical and
traditionally,
yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Does that matter?
I mean, can
he just put on a great show and
that's all
that really counts, or what?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, I think the
convention,
whether it's for the Elks or for
the aluminum
siding industry or for a party,
is basically
the same thing.
It has -- it's to energize the
people who
were there, to validate them, to
unite them.
And in Donald Trump's case, I
think it's to
run a normal convention, and one
where he's
not in any way criticizing or
censuring Republicans
who aren't there, that he rises
above, shows
a spirit of magnanimity.
And I think that's it, perhaps a
lot more
important whether Bobby Knight
stiffs him
and Don King doesn't show up and
Mike Tyson
is invited.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
I do think that that's one of
the keys for
this convention. For me I want
to see at least
30 or 40 members of the Trump
family actually
speaking at the podium, which it
seems we're
getting close to that number
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: But I do want --
it will be
curious to know how organized it
is, because
if they can't organize a
convention, how do
organize an administration or a
fall campaign?
And then the emotional tone.
Conventions are
like coronations, but if you
watch the Trump
speeches leading up in the last
couple of
weeks, it's filled -- it's sour.
He's sour.
He's filled with resentment.
People aren't
treating me nice. CNN has been
mean.
MARK SHIELDS: That's exactly
right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
DAVID BROOKS: And so that's not
a normal convention
mood. So it will be interesting
to see if
he can pivot and actually be
happy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And on top of
that, you have
these world events that we're
following, this
awful attack, Mark, last night
in France,
with all the -- so many people
killed in this
sort of unspeakable act by this
man who drove
his truck through the crowd.
And then, tonight, we're
watching and trying
to understand what's going on in
Turkey. What
effect do events like this have
on a presidential
election?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, there is a
certain numbing
effect right now.
It's crisis upon crisis, tragedy
upon tragedy.
And, I mean, I think we're
reeling, quite
honestly. And Nice was just of a
different
order of magnitude, the idea of
driving a
truck through families and
people celebrating
independence day at 70 miles an
hour, and
not slowing down.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But does it mean
that...
MARK SHIELDS: As far as our
politics are concerned?
JUDY WOODRUFF: That Americans
want a leader
who is more stable, or someone
who is going
to change things?
MARK SHIELDS: I think there is
always -- in
the short run, the call for bold
action over
thoughtful, restrained action
has an appeal.
I mean, people are enraged,
they're insecure,
they're unsure, and the sure,
certain trumpet
that sounds has an appeal at a
time like that.
I mean, it's not like we're on
the eve of
an election, and not whether
Donald Trump
has a program or the
credentials. But he is
the bold voice, as opposed to
the voice of
restraint and experience that
Secretary Clinton
purports to offer.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I don't think
Trump would
exist as a viable candidate if
it's not for
this climate for the past couple
of years
of psychological blows the world
has endured.
You start with the economic
stuff, anxiety
which is of longstanding nature,
but you go
back to the beheadings, the ISIS
beheadings.
These were psychologically
damaging for the
country. And what we felt last
week -- we
were on the show last week. It
was rough.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
DAVID BROOKS: It was a very
depressing week.
And then this week is worse. And
what's going
on in Turkey, it's just the
world is spinning
out of order. And so that
implicates the campaign
in two ways. This campaign is in
part a debate
between an ardent nationalist,
which Donald
Trump is sort of a
European-style blood and
soil nationalist, vs. a
candidate on the Democratic
side who is more of a globalist,
who believes
in global institutions.
And these attacks all around the
world, we
see the dark side of
globalization. And so
I do think they help Trump. And
then to me,
the interesting thing is, people
are going
to want order, as Mark said.
They are going
to want somebody who is going to
preserve
order.
Normally, that means they want
experience.
And that would be good for
Clinton. But I
think in this climate of chaos,
they are going
to want toughness and the sort
of like this
authoritarianism. And that's
sort of up more
Trump's alley.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Even when there's
no link,
no proven link, yet?
For example, in France, this man
who drove
this truck, Mark, they still
don't have a
connection between him and ISIS.
It could
have been the act of one person
disgruntled,
upset with his life.
MARK SHIELDS: No, you're right,
Judy.
But, to David's point, it's
nationalism, too.
He was a Tunisian, of Tunisian
origin and
descent. So, he was the other.
And think this
is very much -- that is very
much in our politics.
David raised the point about
chaos in the
world. This is why the
convention is important
and Donald Trump's deportment,
comportment
are, because, I mean, because
this should
be an advantage to him right
now, as the out-party
and the one who has been
preaching this message
of nationalism.
But he does projected chaos. And
I think to
that degree this -- it hurts --
it will hurt
him, if in fact, at the
convention in Cleveland,
he personally exemplifies or
represents chaos
or the convention itself does. I
think that's
a risk, a high risk for him.
DAVID BROOKS: It should be said
that the New
York Times/CBS poll came out
this week, and
it showed Clinton and Trump tied
at 40.
And what is interesting about
the polls over
the past couple of months, is
that he doesn't
move. He's at 40. She rises and
falls, but
he doesn't move. And so a lot of
this climate
is, I think, more affecting her
vote somehow
than his vote.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that poll --
those polls,
I guess -- and she did slip -- I
guess came
after the really bad week she
had with the
release of the e-mails.
DAVID BROOKS: Some of it was the
e-mails,
but I think some of it was also
just the Dallas,
the police killings, somehow the
sense of
just social unraveling, all the
comparisons
people were making to 1968.
JUDY WOODRUFF: She did this past
week -- it
seems like it was forever ago,
but it was
just Tuesday -- she did get
endorse of Bernie
Sanders, who held out for a long
time, Mark.
Is that -- how much -- go ahead.
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: I think the timing
was better.
If anything, she did need a lift
this week.
After Comey and the e-mails and
after Dallas
and after Baton Rouge and after
Minnesota,
she needed -- Secretary Clinton
needed a lift,
and I think Bernie Sanders'
endorsement gave
her a lift. If it had come two
weeks earlier,
as so many Clinton folks were
urging and exhorting
him to do, I don't think it
probably would
have given the kind of upper
that she did
need at that time, even in the
midst of a
week in which it was very much
eclipsed.
But Bernie made a good case for
her candidacy,
basically, based on Bernie's
campaign.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I was going to
say, how enthusiastic
was it?
(CROSSTALK)
MARK SHIELDS: No, that's it.
Nobody delivers.
We don't deliver anything in
this country
anymore, Judy. Nobody delivers
votes.
But his enthusiastic endorsement
of her and
the party unity are going to be
important.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you
think?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I think the
Democratic
Party will be united.
I have always thought that. She
has now 85
percent of his vote. By the end
of the convention,
it will be 90-something. It will
be united.
I think what's changing is, are
his issues
on the forefront anymore?
And so, if we look around the
world right
now, are the banks really what
people are
fearing most, or is it ISIS, or
is it...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Inequity.
DAVID BROOKS: Or is it racial
issues that
have suddenly risen to the fore?
MARK SHIELDS: Yes.
DAVID BROOKS: And so I think
some of his issues,
at least for the time being, are
being eclipsed,
and so that changes the
landscape for her.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, speaking of
one of those,
we have almost forgotten to
mention that there
was another terrible -- there
were shootings,
we have been watching, Mark, of
black men
by police.
But then we had just within the
last week
the terrible massacre of police
officers in
Dallas. And then there was this
quite remarkable
memorial service this week. And
you were telling
us earlier today it may be the
one bright
spot.
MARK SHIELDS: It was. It was the
one bright
spot for me in the whole week.
It was almost
traditional.
It was what Americans have come
to expect
at a time of crisis and tragedy.
And that
is bipartisanship. I mean, Ted
Cruz, one of
the president's archest critics,
flew down
on Air Force One with him. John
Cornyn, the
Republican leader in the Senate,
deputy leader,
introduced the president.
The president -- President
George W. Bush,
I thought, gave a quite personal
Dallas perspective.
And the president is comforter
in chief. He
does it so well. The police
chief of Dallas,
David Brown, both Hillary
Clinton and Donald
Trump ought to be grateful that
he hasn't
entered any of the races. He's
just so impressive.
And I just thought there was a
sense of unity,
of reconciliation, of national
agreement at
that Dallas ceremony.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Quick word?
DAVID BROOKS: And I have to say,
that's what
real America is.
I have been on this tour of the
country the
last several months to San
Antonio or New
Mexico or Fresno or West
Virginia. And it's
-- the country I filled with
healers, people
healing the social fabric. And
we get down.
The news events are horrible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We focus on the
bad things.
DAVID BROOKS: But there is a
day-to-day reality.
And it's actually a little
closer to what
President Obama was saying than
sometimes
the coup and some of horrible
events that
do we have to cover, obviously.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's a
better note to
end on than most of the news
tonight.
David Brooks, Mark Shields,
thank you both.
And we will see you in
Cleveland.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you. Look
forward to it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: Congress
released a long-classified
section of its
report on the 9/11 attacks. It
details possible
links between the hijackers and
officials
in Saudi Arabia. But it also
notes that subsequent
investigations found no such
links.
At the White House, Press
Secretary Josh Earnest
said the information doesn't
change the fundamental
facts.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
They didn't find any evidence
the Saudi government
as an institution or senior
Saudi officials
individually funded al-Qaida.
That's the definitive
word of the outside experts who
took an unvarnished
look and this particular
situation, and that's
the -- that conclusion is
unchanged.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Saudi
ambassador to the
U.S. said today the released
information -- quote
-- "absolutely exonerates" his
government.
In Iraq, tens of thousands of
protesters rallied
again in Central Baghdad. Most
are supporters
of Shiite cleric Muqtada
al-Sadr, a long-time
critic of the government. The
crowds waved
Iraqi flags and chanted slogans,
calling Prime
Minister Haider al-Abadi a
thief. His government
has struggled to end corruption
and stop terror
attacks in the capital.
Mourners gathered in Baton
Rouge, Louisiana,
today for the funeral of Alton
Sterling, who
was shot to death by two white
police officers
last week. Several thousand
people attended
the service, just days after the
incident
triggered protests, and some 200
arrests.
And in Plano, Texas police
turned out again
for the funeral of Michael Krol.
He was one
of five officers killed by a
sniper in Dallas
last week.
And Wall Street's rally fizzled
on this Friday.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 10
points to close at 18516. But
the Nasdaq fell
four points, and the S&P 500
dropped two.
points to close at 18516. But
the Nasdaq fell
four points, and the S&P 500
dropped two.
Now updating our lead story, the
crisis in
Turkey, a struggle for power is
under way
tonight, with the military
announcing that
it has carried out a coup and
that it's imposed
martial law. It blames growing
terrorism and
repressive rule. And it says
that a peace
council will act to restore
democracy in the
NATO member state.
There are reports of tanks
firing near the
parliament building in Ankara,
the capital,
and helicopters and fighter
planes attacking
key points in both Ankara and
Istanbul. Troops
are out in the streets, sealing
off some government
buildings and bridges.
But President Recep Tayyip
Erdogan called
CNN's Turkish branch to insist
the coup will
fail. He urged his supporters to
rally, and
later soldiers reportedly fired
on people
trying to protest the coup in
Istanbul.
Here in Washington, the White
House says President
Obama is watching all these
rapidly developing
situations -- this rapidly
developing situation.
Turkey has been a key U.S. ally
and a front-line
member of the coalition battling
Islamic State
militants in Syria.
And now a reminder about some
upcoming programs
from our PBS colleagues. Gwen
Ifill's already
in Cleveland preparing for
"Washington Week,"
which airs later tonight.
Here's a preview:
GWEN IFILL: Hi there, Judy.
We're in Cleveland tonight for a
special "Washington
Week" road show, talking all
things Donald
Trump, Mike Pence and next
week's Republican
nominating convention. It's a
full plate,
so we will run for an hour on
most PBS stations.
And I will see you here next
week for our
convention coverage -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I wouldn't miss
it.
Also tonight at 9:00 p.m. here
on PBS, "America
in Black and Blue," a "PBS
NewsHour Weekend"
Also tonight at 9:00 p.m. here
on PBS, "America
in Black and Blue," a "PBS
NewsHour Weekend"
special report.
And don't forget, starting
Monday, as we just
suggested, Gwen and I will be
anchoring live
special coverage of the
Republican National
Convention. Take a look.
NARRATOR: With so much at stake,
you need
election coverage you can trust.
That's why
the "PBS NewsHour" has teamed up
with NPR
to bring you prime-time coverage
of the conventions.
Gwen Ifill and Judy Woodruff are
joined by
NPR's Rachel Martin for
balanced, in-depth
reporting you won't find
anywhere else.
Join us for live coverage of the
Republican
National Convention, begins
Monday, July 18,
at 8:00/7:00 Central, only on
PBS and NPR
stations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will also be
anchoring the
"NewsHour" on Monday from
Cleveland, with
the start of our look at who are
the Republicans
as they prepare to nominate
Donald Trump for
president.
That's the "NewsHour" for this
night. I'm
Judy Woodruff. Have a great
weekend. Thank
you, and good night.